---
title: Pun hazard
author: Călin Ardelean
tags: meta
math: true
---

Welcome to the jungle!
----------------------

This is my personal blog on functional programming and its application
to real-time simulation.
You may expect intermittent pieces on logic $\cap$ math $\cap$ physics,
and hopefully not too many rants.
But ultimately, I have no clue what the blog will end up raving about.
For all I know it could spawn enormous Juche pumas playing cylindrical Go along
Iapetus' equatorial ridge, sabotaging the moon's hydrostatic balance.
Worse, I couldn't snatch it a rigid designator, leading to a dangerous
pun-core compromise.
But let me apologize and elaborate.

[Functional fixity][fixity] is a term from cognitive science describing one's
inability to use an object in a novel way.
It's your memory entangling the representation of the object with that of its
intended function, typically after prolonged praxis.

For instance, after learning to work a monad to a particular goal, a fledgling
Haskeller may feel inclined to blog about what monads are like, promptly
forgetting the structure and laws of the mathematical object, a lapse that has
little to do, I'll argue, with the suitability of figurative language
for presenting abstract concepts.

Brent Yorgey's [classic article][brent] tells the story of the failed monad
tutor who supplies just the root of his intuition and expects the entire tree
to magically string along into his reader's head, confusing, as it were,
the pattern used for naming common metaphors (**A is B**), with the metaphors
themselves, which develop from elementary inter-domain mappings of arbitrary
complexity.
He concludes with a fair advice: play with the abstract concept itself,
don't just get accustomed with more of its incarnations and business roles.

But throughout the piece there is an undertone, or potential uncharitable
reading, of a rusty grammarian that 'splains: *"analogy is bad, m'kay?"*.
The Haskell community was quick to pick up on it, and confessed they actually
take no pickle with [burrito] expositions.
And I concur, even outright allegories are fly as long as the interpretation
maintains a sense of [faithfulness][quotient] that allows crisscrossing
the domain boundaries without garbling the meaning.
I also think that people are pretty good at it, and the confusion Brent's
article poses is a bit of a straw man, as the real problem is that of
functional fixity, or, in general, *"the curse of knowledge"*, two concepts
I've recently been exposed to by Steven Pinker's wonderful book
["The Sense of Style"][pinker].

One successful way of dealing with such fixations is indeed stripping
the usage connotations away from the description of the decomposed,
un-narrativised object, like substituting the *wick* of a *candle* with
*interwoven fibrous strands*, but another reported method specifically
involves judicious use of shortcutting analogy.
Rather then wailing destitution, potatoes can be your salvation.

As for myself, after 2 years packed with Haskell related papers, books, online
courses and other materials, I still cannot recognize a full frontal monad, eyes
scolding, for I've got into a habit of only thinking about them at practical
applications' express requisition.
So I wish to transfix this routine with gratuitous multi-modal strolls of
prolixity and higher-ranked functional references.
Or so this cortege of thought seems to betoken.

The markdown and the beast
--------------------------

Overall I'm quite pleased with [Hakyll], the Haskell [Jakyll].

For convenient [GitHub Pages][github] hosting, you can either keep the sources
in the same repo with the output, in which case you'll need some convoluted
scripts to strap it together, or you can figure it's not worth the bother and
just manage a slightly more tedious [2][repo1] - [repo][repo2] setup, like me.
After committing changes in the source repo, I run `site deploy` and then
`git commit` and `git push` the front repo.
I even dig the extra control.

*Hakyll* comes integrated with the mighty, multilingual [pandoc], that
champions an enriched [Markdown] dialect I'm delighted to dance with.
In particular, you can write paper-like articles, publish them straightforwardly
on your blog, and generate alongside a *pdf* with the `pandoc` executable,
all the while inlining *LaTeX* for math.

To render the formulas you can pick a standard *js* service like *MathJax* or,
with the [`WebTeX`][HTMLMathMethod] constructor, a remote image service like
*Google Chart API*, or you can generate math images directly on your server
with the [__latex-formulae-hakyll__][lfh] package, all painless to setup.
Currently, the blog employs the [`MathML`][HTMLMathMethod] variant to deliver
*MathML* directly inside the *XHTML*.
Moreover, it injects an icon under the headline (but only if the *Markdown*
source file is explicitly tagged with `math` in the header section, like this
post's), to encourage readers to use a browser sporting native *MathML*, like
*Firefox* or *Safari*.

Here's a test formula for you:
$\hat{f}(\xi) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty f(x)\ e^{- 2\pi i x \xi}\,dx.$

Web theme
---------

I started with the default *Hakyll* theme but made a few adjustments.

All sizes, including fonts and page width, are relative (in `em` units).
There is also no `font-family` setting, so the site will use the default fonts
on all devices.
High-dpi displays won't collapse the text into a string of microscopic black
holes, while on wide screens the need for binoculars and current line
markers for navigation will be eschewed.

The black icons are vectorial (*SVG*), so they look smooth on high-dpi too.
With a *SVG* editor like [Inkscape] it's snappy to take some public domain
icon from the net (wikipedia has plenty) and delete layers, change colors and
sizes, or add your own shapes.
The hover effect just uses the *CSS3* `opacity` property.

I followed [Dan Piponi][dan]'s example and inlined the *archive* page into *home*
and *contact* into the footer.
I reckoned the text that would normally go there would be something
generic, and surely I'd write more compelling things in the actual blog?!?
So why would I pin the trivia?
These days, personal info belongs to social networking accounts.
And being more honest by placing the index inside `index.html` should benefit
search engine robots' situational awareness (humans' too!).

Hope this pasta is plain enough for a copy.

[fixity]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_fixedness "Functional fixedness - Wikipedia"
[brent]: https://byorgey.wordpress.com/2009/01/12/abstraction-intuition-and-the-monad-tutorial-fallacy/ "Abstraction, intuition, and the “monad tutorial fallacy”"
[burrito]: http://blog.plover.com/prog/burritos.html "Monads are like burritos - The Universe of Discourse"
[pinker]: http://wadler.blogspot.ro/2016/02/steven-pinkers-sense-of-style.html "Steven Pinker's The Sense of Style - Wadler's Blog"
[quotient]: http://blog.sigfpe.com/2014/05/types-and-two-approaches-to-problem.html "Types, and two approaches to problem solving - A Neighborhood of Infinity"

[Hakyll]: http://jaspervdj.be/hakyll "Hakyll"
[Jakyll]: http://jekyllrb.com/ "Jakyll"
[github]: https://pages.github.com "GitHub Pages"
[repo1]: https://github.com/mmn80/mmn80.github.io.src "Source Repo for this Blog"
[repo2]: https://github.com/mmn80/mmn80.github.io "Main GitHub Pages Repo"
[pandoc]: http://pandoc.org/README.html "Pandoc User’s Guide"
[Markdown]: http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/ "Markdown"
[HTMLMathMethod]: http://hackage.haskell.org/package/pandoc/docs/Text-Pandoc-Options.html#t:HTMLMathMethod "Documentation for pandoc math rendering options"
[lfh]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/latex-formulae-hakyll-0.2.0.1 "The latex-formulae-hakyll package on Hackage"

[Inkscape]: https://inkscape.org/en/ "Inkscape"
[dan]: http://blog.sigfpe.com/ "A Neighborhood of Infinity"
